in today's episode of health theory with
dr david perlmutter we discuss how to
reverse the damage your lifestyle is
causing your gut the four metrics you
must know to call yourself healthy the
real cause of alzheimer's and the secret
to effective aerobic exercise
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr david perlmutter
he's a board-certified neurologist and
the four-time new york times
best-selling author of grain brain brain
maker and several others he witnessed
his first brain surgery at the age of 13
and went on to publish his first paper
and give his first lecture on the brain
at just 19. since then his innovative
approach to medicine has made him one of
the most sought-after minds on the
planet in the fields of nutrition and
brain health he's won countless honors
and awards and has been interviewed by
everyone from oprah and dr oz to 2020
and larry king live
and as somebody who's existed on the
cutting edge basically your entire
career what i want to know is what is
the cutting edge now
what are you thinking about this may be
a little bit controversial that you're
exploring that you think is going to
have a big impact
we said five years ago uh maybe you
should not stop eating gluten and cut
back on your carbs and eat more dare i
say fat
and boy did people's feathers get
ruffled with that so
i found that it felt good to be
disruptive and challenge the status quo
ronald reagan said that status quo is a
latin term for the mess we're in and i
think that what i foresee
is that we are going to see a virtual
explosion
in the ability to harness big data and
moving forward manipulate that data
using artificial intelligence to really
be far more specific
about making recommendations for tom
what do you need based upon who you are
what does your genome look like what
does your microbiome look like what are
your lifestyle choices today
where do you live geographically what's
available to you and therefore be very
specific individually
in terms of what your needs are what's
really important i think
is we are now seeing unexpectedly
the ability to leverage
personalized medicine biometrics
to the larger audience you know which it
kind of gets back to the idea of looking
at the few to extrapolate to the many i
mean that's how drug trials work for
example
we know that at most three percent of
people are ever sampled and utilized
data wise to make recommendations for
the remaining 97 in terms of a drug
and yet now with this ability to crunch
this data and move forward i think we're
going to really understand
the larger the bigger strokes that uh
you know frankly we know that not
everybody today and certainly moving
forward is going to be available to uh
participate in specific personalized
medicine but i think we're going to
learn what really has traction with
respect to the broad strokes
and what do you think people should be
tracking now like what's a meaningful
should i be wearing an aura ring or a
constant glucose monitor like what are
what are the data points now that that
you collect or that you recommend that
people collect
well it's a good question because you
know as you well know there are so
there's such incredible availability
right now to look at changes in your
microbiome on almost a daily basis for
example uh certainly your genome is a
great place to start that doesn't change
or does it
we in reality we know that our
day-to-day lifestyle choices
are hugely influential
on the expression of your
life code that we thought was really
locked up in a glass case and we now
recognize absolutely
is not so
i think that to start with we should all
understand our genomes
whether it's 23andme or any other
service that's out there
it's not just getting your genome
sequence but then manipulating that data
to understand what your current needs
are before you even begin tracking as
you move forward how do we manipulate it
i've actually heard somebody say that
before yeah there are several online
sites that are available to upload your
23andme data you just drag the file and
drop it into various sites dr ben lynch
author of a book called dirty jeans has
a terrific site
and from that you learn
not just
what your genome says but more
importantly what does it mean
i learned some things about myself that
i never knew that did change
my lifestyle choices to some small
degree one thing i learned is that
i tom am a poor methylator what does it
mean it means that i have not the most
favorable genes in a pathway called
mthfr along with about 20 to 22 percent
of americans people need to know that
what's the impact of that like if you
were not to address it the outcome so
one of the most common things that we
see with people who are poor methylators
is uh for example that my homocysteine
level can go up and why is that an issue
well homocysteine
is a powerful risk factor for
alzheimer's
so it really takes us away from the
notion of alzheimer's being a genetic
issue either you have the alzheimer's
gene or you don't
to
alzheimer's being related to modifiable
lifestyle factors now other things that
are important i think people should be
following
their homocysteine level as mentioned
vitamin d level i think knowing
you're fasting glucose level on a pretty
regular basis whether you have an
onboard
glucometer or not i think to me
i find that to be a little bit of an
overkill i think you can get a good
sense if you measure blood sugar maybe
once or twice a week
with a finger stick i think you should
know your ketone levels
your hemoglobin a1c or so-called average
blood sugar i think is hugely important
what do you think is a good number there
well i've learned in the few years that
i've been at this that um
you know i'm the kind of guy and i i
think you probably are too uh
who says well some is good more is
better but in terms of medicine uh it's
not always the case at a lower insulin
level a lower a hemoglobin a1c or a
lower blood sugar is necessarily
better for you i mean i
five years ago popularized the idea that
we really have to get our insulin levels
low
because it would be a an indication that
we were eating less carbs having less
blood sugar elevations
and b
it would ultimately help restrict our
risk for developing
insulin resistance
and now we see publications that at the
very lowest ranges
of insulin there is actually at least in
women an increased risk risk a
profoundly increased risk of becoming
demented
and is it the same risk so they see it
on the low end do they see that same
risk then on the high end well the the
risk on the low end and again this is
just in women but that's very important
since you know two out of every three
alzheimer's patients is uh are women
uh but it's important uh that at the
lowest range the risk was increased
about 2.38 x at the high range it was
increased about 1.7 x so they're
actually worse off if they're
really really interesting how would you
depress your insulin that low
well i think this gets to the point of
uh gene expression i think people have
certain what we call polymorphisms of
genes that might not code for adequate
insulin activity so
a plus being of course on an extremely
low sugar low carbohydrate diet so it
gets to again back to dare i say the
sweet spot it's a terrible misnomer i
think
as it relates to blood sugar and our
diets we shouldn't
opt for the sweet spot but uh
you know it it's it's relevant for us to
understand in the context of this
discussion
that as we get together and talk about
this 2018
we have no treatment
for alzheimer's
none nothing works nothing reduces the
the rate at which people decline
and
to me it's very compelling that last
month
the journal of the american medical
association put out a study
by dr richard kennedy
which was actually
a meta-analysis of some of the the top
10 best
evaluations of the efficacy of so-called
alzheimer's drugs though there is no
drug that works yet
alzheimer's drugs
you know are selling at the rate of
close to a billion dollars in our
country annually we've known that they
don't work but what was published last
month
was really quite compelling
by the journal of the american medical
association not only do the drugs not
work
but they speed the cognitive decline
of patients who are taking them what are
they attacking what's the
the notion behind the drug must be
something that it
what well there are two drugs
or
none of the drugs are involved in in
dealing with beta amyloid
the first class of drugs representing
the lion's share about 76 percent
are what are called cholinesterase
inhibitors and these are drugs like
aerocept or donepezil that inhibit an
enzyme that degrades a neurotransmitter
called acetylcholine because it was
noted decades ago
that the alzheimer's brain is a brain
that is low in acetylcholine and a very
simplistic approach would be hey we can
bump up acetylcholine that'll be a good
thing and it'll help people well it
never has shown any efficacy and yet
it receives fda approval another story
for another time but now it's not just
that it doesn't work but it's hastening
cognitive decline in the very people who
can't afford that and you think of the
families who
have dad or mom or husband or wife on
these drugs and they're actually making
people worse it's like
giving somebody a treatment for their
diabetes that is raising their blood
sugar and you bring up the idea of
getting rid of plaque
uh it's been noted since the this the
naming of alzheimer's disease after a
doctor always alzheimer who first
described the pathology of what this
looked like in the brain of a woman
dying of that disease that now bears his
name
and the plaques were noted then and
since that time
scientists and clinicians alike have
really focused on the plaque
as being the thing we've got to get rid
of
and it turns out that
researchers like dr rudolph tanzi at
harvard have made it very clear that the
plaque is the response to the problem
not the cause of the problem
the plaque
is what we call an antimicrobial peptide
and it's the brain's way of responding
to perhaps infectious agents like herpes
simplex virus or chlamydia infection so
you know it is said that the enemy of my
enemy is my friend we need to embrace
beta amyloid as being there for a very
important reason
when we rid the brain of beta amyloid as
has been tried in clinical study after
clinical trial
patients declined much more quickly
that might underlie why pfizer in
february of this year said no more we're
just not going to pursue the notion of
an alzheimer's drug anymore we've got to
leave the beta amyloid alone
there was a move a couple of years ago
for the fda to approve
brain scans that would measure the
amount of beta amyloid load in a patient
as a way of being diagnostic do you have
alzheimer's or are you on the way to
that
and they didn't prove it because they
realized that people can have a head
full
of beta amyloid and be cognitively
perfectly intact whereas others with
very little beta amyloid actually would
demonstrate the clinical manifestations
of alzheimer's disease um so looking at
uh you said that okay pfizer's pulled
out they're no longer making alzheimer's
drugs but the one thing that is
recognized to help is exercise
we know that exercise has a sort of what
i'll call a real-time effect on blood
sugar
and you're the first person that i've
heard anyway talk about the knock-on
effect of
insulin doing more than just shuttling
blood sugar out of your cells
what are the the factors you think that
are at play here and what are the
behaviors that we should take to make
sure that we stave off dementia as long
as humanly possible
what a concept what concept that
this disease affecting 5.4 million
americans 40 million people globally
costing us a trillion dollars higher
than the market values of apple or
google
predicted to triple by the year 2050
that our lifestyle choices
can be leveraged to reduce our risk that
will affect 50 percent of people age 85
or older the flip of a coin
so
in that uh through that lens let's go
back to where we were the value of
exercise
and i'd say uh your points about insulin
sensitivity are well taken very
important keeping blood sugar down
enhancing the sensitivity of the insulin
receptor i want to come back to that
because i think
i'm seeing a big elephant in the room
that we need to talk about and that is
that physical exercise
changes your gene expression you were
able to change the expression of this
previously thought to be immutable life
code for the better and lead to the
expression of what we call a
trophic hormone or growth hormone for
the brain bdnf
brain derived neurotrophic factor
there are many things you could do to
amp up bdnf you can use
turmeric in your cooking take a dha
supplement
even cbd has been demonstrated recently
to increase
bdnf but the most important thing you
need to buy
to improve your bdnf is a new pair of
running shoes because aerobic exercise
is able to manipulate the expression of
his bdnf why specifically aerobic well
to a lesser degree uh resistance
exercise as well but i'm simply telling
people 20 minutes a day five days a week
hopefully more
at a heart rate value of 180 minus your
age as a target of course consult your
health care practitioner
but what a powerful way
to reduce your risk for dementia how can
i connect those dots and make that
statement to you as we sit here well the
journal of the american medical
association has wonderfully correlated
baseline bdnf levels with
future risk for dementia you want to
have more of this chemical that does two
important things
it increases the growth of new brain
cells in your brain's memory center
which is a powerful target for
alzheimer's okay and it also increases
the connection of brain cells one to the
other a process called
neuroplasticity that we can
actually
allow our brains to take advantage of
the experiences that we then choose to
pursue
to build a better brain and that is is
the bdnf a building block of that or no
it is not it's a signaling model it is a
signaling molecule i mean our brain
cells want to connect to each other and
our lifestyle choices that are highly
stressful that are deprived of
restorative sleep that are higher in
sugar in terms of diet
that are overall stressful
increase cortisol for example that
inhibits the growth of new brain cells
actually compromises
our brain cell population in the very
areas that we need them most like the
memory center the hippocampus so we can
we can reverse that we can tip the
scales in our favor and say i'm not
going to continue losing brain cells i'm
actually going to repopulate my memory
center with new brain cells that study
was done
out here at
ucla in collaboration with researchers
at university of pittsburgh
led by a dr erickson demonstrating two
groups of people a hundred people in
each group one group stretched for a
period of a year the other group was
involved in aerobics they found that
those who stretched had lower levels of
bdnf declining memory function and
shrinkage on very sophisticated brain
scans in terms of their hippocampus size
which is the let's pause there because i
want to walk through this and make sure
that i understand
yeah this is incredible and potentially
very useful but i want to make sure that
i understand the sequence of events
right okay so first of all does bdnf
trigger the regrowth of brain cells
across the brain or just the hippocampus
good point we used to say the brain
doesn't grow new brain cells end a story
right i mean uh you're probably too
young to know that i don't know that's
what i was taught when i was in medical
school we were told that
your brain grew maxes out at about age
18 then every beer you drink after that
it's 40 000 brain cells or whatever the
magic number was for whatever reason i
don't remember that but
um
how incredible that
in your 90s you were still growing your
brain cells you have this gift
of regrowth of neurogenesis it's a
choice you can make you can make it
today after watching this podcast by
dragging those sneakers out and
if only going to the mailbox is as far
as you can go then have at it tomorrow
you'll do that twice and the sequence is
you're doing the exercise the exercise
is creating bdnf bdnf is then triggering
hippocampal cell growth
yes but beyond that another area too
called the subventricular layer of the
what's called the ependyma in
the layer of cells that underlies those
fluid-filled compartments that you see
when you look at a brain scan but for
our purposes
the uh
synaptoplasticity and the
neuroplasticity the connection of brain
cells happens throughout the brain um we
also depend on a process called synaptic
pruning what does that mean
it means that also for brain function we
have to have the ability
as we are in our
childhood and adolescence to cut back on
the number of connections that we have
in order to kind of refine the the
computer to make it work at its optimal
level so which it's doing i'm assuming
based on repetition what you do the most
is going to get the most connections
it's going to get the most the highest
degree of insulation exactly all of that
neurons that fire together will wire
together and those that don't will
atrophy will fall off the tree and so
you're saying that that process the
firing together and wiring together is
um one repetition two you get the bdnf
if you're exercising that
washes the brain in some way signals to
them hey to in some way that makes them
more active more likely to connect
so what is the advantage then the
evolutionarily
coded or selected advantage
that exercising people
should have higher levels of bdnf and
ultimately let's just say be more
able to survive and cognitively
superior
in evolutionary terms
and i guess it's the people who
were healthy enough to hunt and gather
and to lead uh you know the expeditions
in our paleolithic times so these
individuals and i've never thought this
before i just was
having a bit of a free association while
you're talking these are our ancestors
and
evolutionarily they were selected
because they were
leading the group
so uh
uh
we can play upon that now that we
understand that it's interesting do you
think that there's any relation between
movement
and memory because of the if you're
moving and you're hunting or whatever
you need spatial relations you need to
understand sort of where you are so i
ask all these questions because
one like even when people talk about
exercise i never do cardio i hate cardio
it's painful
but i lift all the time but if you're
telling me that that's actually not as
powerful
then i'll start doing cardio um so i
guess understanding like the the nuance
level so that i know how to act
is ultimately the the driving force by
my questions um so i think i understand
bdnf which is fascinating in in the last
10 minutes my understanding of why that
matters has skyrocketed i want to go
back to
the ha1c levels
i want to pin you down for a number and
i'll tell you why so on staff we have a
vegan and i once watched him cane an
entire package of blackberries and as he
was doing it i could feel my blood sugar
rising
and i was like there's no way this kid's
gonna die like he is he's too good at
his job for me to let him die so i'm
like you have to go get your levels
checked and he did and they'll they fall
with when in what i would consider
normal ranges so i want to know if i'm
delusional on that if there just is that
much genetic variability because that
would have spiked i know because i take
my blood sugar levels quite frequently
that would have spiked me to over 100
for sure it may have pushed me closer to
like 120 to have you can't imagine how
many blackberries he ate um but his
his h um a1c level was 5.1
and he eats like that all the time
so well three things come to mind first
i i want it not to be missed that our
time together may have compelled you to
engage in aerobic exercise
that
that's great i mean that is huge and uh
you know what compelled me was the
science the data
my personal risk for alzheimer's having
lost my father to that disease and then
just understanding how pervasive
and preventable the situation is but uh
if if you've changed your exercise
routine based upon our time together
then i'm grateful that i came out here
that's great next point
uh the ideal uh being in the normal
range you brought up that
term and
i i just really recoil at the notion of
a normal range because normal really
by definition is average it's you know
whatever the number is a thousand
samples and then one standard deviation
on either side the normal range and that
doesn't work
uh in terms of my messaging i want
optimal so
a normal range of vitamin d
between 30 and 100 so a patient will say
well my level's in the normal range doc
i'm at 31. uh there's a term for that
it's means it is that sucks not that i
use it that often but it really does we
need optimal well then you know
good enough normal range is not where we
are we want tip top and so as it relates
to hemoglobin a1c
tempering my next commentary with the
notion of the u-shaped curve
i would say a range would be between
let's say
five to maybe about 5.3 5.4 now
to get to your third point of your
friend who's eating a lot of berries
first of all
it's a lot of sugar it's a lot of fruit
sugar called fructose which has uh
almost no effect on insulin as you know
there is glucose in there and ultimately
uh he will to some degree
glycate he'll bind his blood sugar to
protein in the case of hemoglobin a1c
hemoglobin and ultimately will increase
that activity and it'll be measurable
but you say he does it all the time
he's eating whole fruit with fiber
to help offset the blood sugar spike
so i think you have to look at
many things in terms of looking at an n
of one
what did his a1c turn out to be based
upon what you've observed there are a
lot of variables here we don't know his
what his microbiome looks like for
example
i think a vegan diet can be
a very salubrious approach however with
certain caveats you're not going to have
great sources of vitamin d b12
fat you know a lot of vegans don't get
enough dietary fat and it's a huge huge
issue
yeah it's interesting when i heard this
story i was like whoa that you you did a
fecal matter transplant
with a child that was suffering from
pronounced autism
i
while i have certainly heard the through
line of hey c-sections lead to a
microbiome that's wildly disrupted which
increases the potential of somebody
developing autism i certainly had never
heard of using a fecal metal transplant
to reduce some of the symptoms of that
um one walk us through that story which
i think is utterly fascinating and two
i'd love to hear
what the pushback is on that where you
think fecal matter transplants are in
terms of efficacy in terms of safety
and i'll say that
knowing that or you should know that i'm
sitting here waiting for the answer
because my wife has struggled profoundly
with
antibiotic-induced microbiome disruption
and if i thought that that was going to
work i would do it immediately but i'm
worried about the safety
well let's address the safety first i
think with a properly screened donor
that
is negligible i mean it is the treatment
of choice uh being carried out at more
than a hundred hospitals in america
today
for an another disruption of the bowel
flora called clostridium difficile or c
diff
the
standard of care treatment using
antibiotics is has an efficacy of
approximately 28
fmt
fecal microbial transplant has an
efficacy uh without recurrence north of
whoa
think about i mean the the reason that
people get c diff in the first place is
from
antibiotic exposure frequently other
drugs can do it as well and they're
treating that the mainstream approach is
to treat it with further
antibiotics you talk about fighting fire
with fire but fmt now has really become
a national uh uh uh well accepted
approach to treating uh cds i wouldn't
be concerned in the least
with respect to safety of that procedure
provided the donor is screened
so a woman arrived in my office with her
child and
i observed him
that he couldn't make eye contact and he
was repetitive motion you know very
characteristic autistic child and i
asked her how did you come to see me
today and i think as i recall she was
from um
mississippi
and she
she said you know i need to tell you the
story how it all happened
she was in the parking lot
of a grocery store
and she couldn't get her child out of
the car
and next to her was parked a gentleman
in a truck
and he apparently apologized to her and
said
that he didn't mean to get in get
involved in this but maybe ought to take
him down to florida to see me of all you
know and uh and she asked him why and
apparently i'd helped somebody in his
family
so she comes to see me
with her son
and it was right then
that i was deeply immersed in the
literature
that was revealing that these kids
have a profound disruption of their gut
bacteria i mean it's almost like an
autism fingerprint and this was many
years several years ago
that we see
very powerful correlations between
these
patterns of gut bacteria and the
manifestation of autism that we see
children who are born by c-section you
alluded to that earlier have an
increased risk of autism and that
c-sections disrupt their microbiome
one researcher clinician
actually a dr feingold
actually was treating
autistic children using vancomycin to
help re an antibiotic to reestablish
some balance and was getting good
results
so i said uh let's at least start with
some
probiotic enemas i instructed her how to
give her child uh probiotics
from the health food store putting him
in an enema and administering them he
improved
he uh doesn't sound like a big deal but
he was able to tie his shoes for the
first time in his life and he was able
to spend the night out at a friend's
house
i mean those are major landmarks they
don't seem like much but they were
as we continued to work with him he
plateaued
maintained his improvements but it was
not continuing
to get where she wanted and i said well
we ought to consider fecal microbial
transplant what is that identifying a
healthy donor
taking the fecal material and
transplanting it into your son's colon
she identified a
healthy 12 year old girl
and i got on the phone with her
and i said i know it sounds really
strange uh and it's way out there but we
just need to do this and she said if
it'll help him
i'm in wow
and she did and he began fmt's his
mother did them at home
and
i was getting ready to give a talk in
germany
his mother sent me a link to a video of
this kid
presenting
book report at school
on benjamin franklin
and it i i got like that getting ready
to give my lecture like i'm getting
right now it took
the wind out of my sails i just couldn't
believe it and he's now in regular
school
in the top 10 percent of his class he
was always bright but he had this
inflammation in the way of his cognitive
performance you know it's like listening
to a
fm radio station in a lightning storm it
was always there
so um
you know that was one of the
things that we did that was certainly
disruptive and eccentric
since then the university of arizona did
an interventional trial
on 20 autistic children demonstrated
profound improvement in these kids where
nothing has helped them ever
in collaboration with researchers from
harvard
validating the notion of fecal microbial
transplant as a treatment for autism we
know that we can measure the
permeability of the gut
by looking at levels of something called
lps lipopolysaccharide it's a
chemical that enshrouds the gut many of
the gut bacteria
if the gut lining is leaky
for whatever reason typically because of
disruption of the gut microbiome
then we can measure that lps in the
bloodstream where it doesn't belong
we see dramatic elevations of this lps
meaning inflammation and
breakdown of the gut lining in
alzheimer's autism
major depression
and even lou gehrig's disease
my point is that we focus on the brain
when
there's a heck of a lot going on in the
gut that we're just beginning to unravel
the beginning of our time together you
challenge me you say well what does the
future look like and really as we
understand this relationship between the
gut and the brain
we've got we've we've moved to a new
stadium
and there are new rules written because
as a neurologist i have had
traditionally very few tools in the
toolbox it was very much an adios
diagnose and adios situation it doesn't
really help anybody to go to the
neurologist's office and he or she comes
up with a very exotic name or something
not as exotic like alzheimer's
it's a word
that has incredible
gravitas in a negative way when family
members hear that
and we have no treatment
and yet it's preventable
and um
it's like john kennedy said in his
inauguration that the time to fix the
roof is when the sun is shining and you
know that really has been
you know a fundamental aphorism for me
that to prevent these situations for
which we have no treatment is the call
to action and
there's no doubt
that to a significant degree this
epidemic is preventable and that's the
message that we want to
shout out because
we are
inculcated with the mentality that we
should live our lives however we choose
and come what may they'll be a treatment
right eat crap and we'll give you a
diabetes pill to get your a1c below 7.
what kind of goal is that
but the reality is
treating your diabetes to lower your
blood sugar has
other downstream effects that may not be
good
lowering your cholesterol level with a
statin drug may not be the best thing to
do
and you're deeper on that i've heard you
talk about that statin's effect on
insulin receptors
which was what put it on my radar that
there are potentially other issues or
other things that insulin is doing
because i always just thought of it as
the you know taking the blood sugar out
and putting it in the cell let me see if
i can connect those two the notion of
diabetes and and statin drugs for
example and why i'm really
so seemingly dialed in on diabetes
because if you become a type 2 diabetic
which is by and large a choice
you have quadrupled your risk for
alzheimer's
did i say a disease for which there is
no treatment yeah
so that's why you don't want to become a
type 2 diabetic
in the journal of the american medical
association
in
was the publication of a study called
the women's
women's collaborative study
and it involved
000 women
and demonstrated
that those women taking a statin drug
had an increased risk of developing type
2 diabetes by 71 percent whoa in men
according to a more recent study 2015
journal is diabetologia their risk has
increased about 46
taking a statin drug that's ostensibly
the good thing to do for your heart
is actually associated with a
significant increase risk
for another situation for which guess
what we've got another pill for you so
now you're on your statin and we're
going to add in your diabetes pills
so
this is diabetes that did i say
quadruple is your risk for alzheimer's a
disease for which there is no treatment
so we connect these dots and this is the
information that people need to know
before they capriciously
acquiesce to
taking that drug because my doctor said
my cholesterol level is too high
and truthfully i mean i think we all
well understand that it is a um
a pathway of this cholesterol number
gets me to write that prescription for
this patient and i'll explain that well
high cholesterol is going to give you a
massive heart attack
well that isn't true
that at least 50 percent of myocardial
infarctions in america today occur in
people with normal so-called normal
cholesterol levels beyond that
we have this idea of what is called the
statin brain where taking a satin drug
is associated with cognitive issues
memory issues
and
this is called out on the the jaw the
bottle of medicine that this drug can
affect memory why so
well
your brain loves cholesterol it's a very
important fat as a lining of your brain
cells it acts as a brain
antioxidant and equally important is the
notion that
we talked about vitamin d and how
critically important that is in your
entire body that there are more than 900
receptors in your body for vitamin d
that's how pervasive its actions are and
most of those are in the brain where
does it come from vitamin d oh it comes
from the sun the sunlight shining on
your naked body
changes a chemical into vitamin d what
is the chemical it's cholesterol
i actually did not know that well
cholesterol is from which we make
vitamin d
as it is from which we make testosterone
and progesterone and estrogen and
cortisol
so this vilification of cholesterol is
very much off base
but you got to give somebody credit it
sure paved the way for the notion that
it's bad
and that if you eat eggs your
children will be born naked or some
horrible thing will happen
and that we should lower cholesterol to
incredibly low levels the lower the
better
so the notion of the u-shaped curve has
yet to find its way to that level of
pharmacology
understanding that we need our
cholesterol we love our cholesterol the
issue
that relates to risk for coronary artery
disease is unrelated to cholesterol
cholesterol shows up
when the coronary arteries are inflamed
it shows up to heal the coronary
arteries it's why when a person dies of
a heart attack and you section their
coronary arteries you look at under the
microscope you'll see cholesterol is
there it's trying to heal this
inflammation
it's like blaming the firemen because
they're on scene blaming the firemen
because they're there at the fire
doesn't work that way
it has a lot to do with um
not the number of ldl its value but
whether it's been damaged or not
oxidized or not or bound to sugar
how do you check that you have your
doctor check a glycated ldl or oxidized
ldl and maybe your doctor's going to go
well i'm not sure
i've heard of that or that our lab will
do will do that in which case you need
to move on
because that's what is very clearly
correlated to risk for coronary artery
disease the oxidized level of ldl which
is directly related to blood sugar we're
back where we started
yeah which i don't think in this
interview we've really put our finger on
what i'm sure most people know but i
think it is worth saying what are the
lifestyle choices that are causing this
cascade of essentially inflammation
mostly food
and that should be empowering meaning
you can break the cycle
so uh inflammation is what alzheimer's
is alzheimer's coronary artery disease
parkinson's disease
autism diabetes cancer these are
inflammatory diseases uh the brain in
the alzheimer's patient is virtually on
fire with inflammation the word comes
from the latin inflammare meaning fire
and inflamed
so our lifestyle choices by having
higher levels of blood sugar
bind to our proteins called glycation
that's what a1c measures when we bind
sugar because it's always elevated to
our proteins that challenges our immune
system and the immune system says
something's going on here and that
increases the production of these
chemicals called the cytokines that
mediate inflammation there's a very
interesting uh study
that was published in the journal
neurology back in 2014 and this is a
study that looked at a group of
individuals and a couple several decades
ago
and did a simple blood test measuring
inflammatory markers
it followed these individuals
for 24 years
and it found that those individuals who
24 years ago had the highest level of
inflammation in terms of their blood
markers had a dramatic decrease in the
size of their brains and at the time
they came back to get reevaluated had
poor memory function
we know that there
is a very powerful correlation between
markers of inflammation in the blood and
alzheimer's disease so it's very clear
that we've got to do everything we can
to reduce inflammation and that brings
us back to the gut
because the lining of the gut
that one cell
lining that separates stuff in the gut
from the rest of your body
is the gatekeeper basically for
inflammation in your body
whenever we threaten the gut lining and
that chemical lps and other things
gets in and challenges our immune system
we amp up inflammation and that sets the
stage for every bad chronic disease that
you don't want to get
and when the world health organization
is now telling us
that chronic inflammatory degenerative
conditions are the number one cause of
death on planet earth
we've got to pay attention to that
metric because
it's something over which we have
control based upon our lifestyle choices
like the foods we eat we want to eat
much more primitively much more locally
and and as such reduce inflammation
you wrote an article when you were 16 or
a letter to the editor in the paper i
guess is a more accurate way of saying
it i don't know if you remember this but
came across it in my research and it
basically said speaking of you know
western lifestyle
it basically said
uh
we're all sort of running this
experiment and we're each contributing
to
seeing whose lungs can evolve to handle
pollution and
i don't think that spending a
sunday at the beach or going on a week
trip to the mountains is going to be
enough
and basically intimating that our
current lifestyle is so far removed from
what we've evolved to handle
that
there's a just a fundamental problem and
before we started rolling you and i were
talking about um
the your notion of brainwashed the new
book that you're working on and i just
want to
hear a little bit about that about you
know what are some of the things that
are happening um from a lifestyle
perspective at a broader
level than what we've just been talking
about you know just what we eat but what
we're engaging with
you know negativity and how that
influences the brain and you know
the way that media is presented and the
kinds of influences that they're having
like what are you finding as you look
more deeply at that
i think that uh there is a lot of
traction of the the paleo ideology but
at its core the notion of paleo is one
that says
let's get back to sending the right
signals to our genome which is
hasn't changed in let's say 70 000 years
fundamentally
and it gets gets back to our original
conversation we started today about
how our lifestyle choices are
interpreted by our genome
how our food beyond the macronutrient
content is actually information sending
up-to-date signals as to our environment
to our genome so that our genome can
then in kind respond uh to maintain our
health by responding to the signals to
that it receives our evolution cannot
keep up with the environment to which we
are exposed and the environment to which
we choose to expose ourselves
so
the idea that
we can change that
by going back and trying to think about
what it was that our ancestors
lifestyles must have been like and
therefore cause our genome to express
genes for longevity um reduction of
inflammation in stabilization of
immunity
is i think really very very important
so i think that you know this is really
becoming an area of great interest uh
for a lot of people it's you know
instead of trying to patch up these
problems i think the idea of letting our
genes keep us healthy
is really um
it's it's it's kindness it's really
about reconnecting to that
incredibly beautiful gift that we've
received from all who have come before
us and it's very instructive to
recognize
that
the genes of our gut bacteria are
influencing our genome expression that
those little critters that live within
us are moment to moment changing our
gene expression there's a very
interesting piece of this puzzle that
was just uh solved for me
last month in a journal cell host and
microbe the researcher's name is yun
tang to eng for university of louisville
and
he
gave us information about
the idea that plant cells contain rna we
know that who didn't know that
and that
they are able when we digest plant cells
that
microsomes that then are extruded from
plant cells called exosomes that contain
plant rna
work their way into our gut bacteria and
change the expression of the genetic
material of our gut bacteria so food is
running the show plant food is changing
the expression of our bacteria
genome that leads to three important
things as it relates to our gut bacteria
it changes their rates of multiplication
it changes the metabolic products that
they produce like vitamins and
neurotransmitters
and it changes their location in the gut
hopefully closer to the gut lines they
can help us keep that intact
so that was a very intriguing
couple of dots to connect therefore
our food is uh changing our gene
expression and
we should think about that you know we
say when a woman is pregnant she has to
be careful because now she's eating for
two
or well tom you're eating for a hundred
trillion right now this morning before
we came here
i was having breakfast at the hotel
and
uh the the women next to me uh one woman
was uh
had uh skim milk in her coffee because
we don't want dietary fat
and to which she put several
pink packets of sweetener which the
research shows is profoundly damaging to
the microbiome associated with a
profound increased risk of obesity in a
french study of tens of thousands of
seventy thousand women
and also dramatically increases your
risk for avoiding sugar in the first
place type two diabetes her brain has
been hijacked by media that would let us
believe
that this is the right choice
but that media doesn't have her health
at the core of their interest uh what
that media has
it is their end up bottom line right and
she is simply a pawn
on that chess board being manipulated
that is the focus of this new work
called uh brain
brainwash we're trying to wash people's
brain and push the reset button and
really call out all the ways that
day-to-day
our lifestyle choices are being
manipulated uh you know
learning that
all of our online uh
areas that we explore are being
leveraged to create advertising that's
appealing to us that's not telling you
something that your audience isn't
certainly aware of but it has health
consequences it's not just that you
happen to buy you know the latest pair
of glasses or a shirt it has to do with
your health like this woman this morning
choosing this artificial sweetener and i
will say that we had a premise for the
book about calling out how our brains
are influenced and beyond that how we
connecting with nature how dietary
changes how meditation how various
things can help undo what's been done
how we can harness this notion of
neuroplasticity
and we talked about earlier
by having higher levels of bdnf to then
allow the good pathways to stick
allowing us to connect back to the
prefrontal cortex and act in a more
empathetic way in a more compassionate
way in a way that
recognizes that
our decisions today are going to affect
what happens tomorrow
the notion that we can do that
is is a heck of a gift that we need to
raise awareness of especially these days
when
impulsivity and narcissism seems to be
you know the way things are done today
and we've
certainly got to pay attention to what
uh what will tomorrow bring how will our
actions today
affect ourselves tomorrow and affect the
world tomorrow
so
the dalai lama said that if you want to
be happy
practice compassion
and if you want others to be happy
so in a very real sense
what we choose to do
rewires our brain and changes our
thinking
what i'm saying is that we
presuppose that
our thoughts determine our actions
but in a very real sense our actions
determine our thoughts
yeah let that sink in
that is absolutely fascinating and the
perfect place to
get to my last question but before i ask
that
working these guys find you online and
and i
more than ever i want to stalk you i've
spent the last couple days just living
in your world
and there's some amazing stuff there so
where can people find more about you
i'm
doctorpromoter.com oddly enough is my
website drpearlmutter.com
and i have facebook which is a
davidpearlmuttermd
davidperlmutter is twitter and instagram
i have a newsletter that goes out every
week on doctorpromutter.com
i mean oh i have a youtube channel the
empowering neurologist yes there's a lot
of amazing content there
cool my last question what is the one
change that people could make that would
have the biggest positive impact on
their health
it's a
it's a very difficult question to answer
because there's so many levels of things
we talked about
i would say um
embrace
uh the recognition
that connection
is the most uh powerful notion that that
can we can leverage for
health and for our future connection to
other people i'm going to leave it open
connection to our genome connection to
our microbiome connection to our
families connection to our neighbors
connection to those who live in other
countries and connection to the planet
i love that
amazing answer thank you dr promoter
thank you so much for coming on that was
absolutely extraordinary
guys
he is shaping my thinking i think more
than anybody else right now i i cannot
encourage you enough to go in he's
making connections other people aren't
making he's talking about things that
are
certainly going to rile some people up
but i think are backed by
cutting edge science to be sure but
certainly he always speaks from a place
of what's coming out in the studies it's
absolutely extraordinary
i just have really been blown away with
his ability to go into the hard science
talking at a cellular level and then
also like his last answer about
connection and the way that for him that
really is taking everything into
consideration and not just
connecting to other people but also
connecting to the things you could find
out about yourself bringing us back to
the beginning of the interview where he
was talking about understanding your
data and understanding really who you
are at at a much deeper level than i
think most people really understand
themselves
and i think it's utterly fascinating
that the man that's given us so many
books on dietary impact on the brain is
now showing us a broader perspective on
what's impacting our brain and the ways
that we can really begin to shape our
lives to shape our genetics which i
think is such an interesting idea um it
it's absolutely breathtaking and i will
for sure put my stamp on every second
that you spend in his world learning
from him is the second well spent that
um the highest compliment that i can pay
somebody in his field is to say that i
really believe it will help you live a
longer more productive happier and
healthier life
so dive in you will not regret it all
right if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
all right
thank you again so much
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential